Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
One of the most honored and respected of today's science fiction authors is the English writer
Brian Aldous.
His first science fiction story was published in 1954, and since then he's won every award
the field has to offer, both in this country and throughout Europe.
Aldous is a craftsman of the highest order.
The attention he gives to style, character and structure demonstrates the literary polish
that often distinguishes British science fiction from American.
He's written a few non-science fiction novels in fact that have been bestsellers in England.
We asked him why he chose to concentrate his career in science fiction rather than mainstream
literature.
Well, I regard myself as a writer and this difference that seems to be so apparent to
other people is not so apparent to me.
I'm interested in a kind of literature of ideas and sometimes that strays to one side
of the science fiction fence and sometimes to another.
But it's not as though one day I'm riding a horse and the next day I'm riding a cow.
It's just that I'm in the same vehicle all the time, but sometimes the identification
marks change.
That's the way I see it.
In some of his personal essays on science fiction, Aldous tells of how he was introduced to the
field as a child through Lurid pulp magazines he found at Woolworth's.
His family disapproved of his reading such literature, but Aldous was fascinated and wouldn't
give it up.
He explains why he was so drawn to science fiction at an early age.
I believe it was really that I never had a firm conviction as a child that the world
was as all the grown-ups claimed it to be.
It seemed to me that it was a much more interesting place than any of them believed or that they
sought to deny it was an interesting place at all.
They were all busy working in their shops and making their money and leading their routine
knives.
I was a bit of a scapeologist when I was a child.
I picked up a phrase from an old cowboy movie where one of the wrestlers says out of the
corner of his mouth, let's go while a goreng's good.
And that became a kind of motto for me and at the age of four I was the hottest wrestler
in East Deerham Norfolk and I used to go while the going was good.
So I had that streak of wildness in me I suppose you could say.
Aldous' streak of wildness later led to unique experiments in some of his science fiction
novels.
He gained a reputation as an innovator, as a science fiction author who wasn't afraid
to introduce new styles and concepts into a fairly traditional field.
Two good examples of his innovative techniques were the novels report on probability A in
Barefoot in the Head published in the late 60s.
Their complex styles were avant-garde and confusing to many science fiction readers.
We asked Aldous if he deliberately sought to open up science fiction or enlarge its
boundaries with such experiments.
Would you understand that it's not exactly a motive in writing to expand the field?
I think what you think you're doing at the time is trying to find a little, how should
we mix the metaphor?
Trying to find a little breathing space where the ground isn't too trampled already by the
hordes of other writers.
And so you seek out I suppose the perimeters of the field as it's currently defined.
And in that way if you accidentally extend it well, that's very nice.
And of course some people are grateful to you and other people are very cross with you for
doing it because they say you're breaking the rules.
Next time we'll talk with Brian Aldous about some of his works.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
In 1973 Brian Aldous published a book on the origin and history of science fiction entitled
Billion Years Spree.
He gave us an interesting account of the reasons he wrote the book, including some comments
on one of his novels, Barefoot in the Head.
Well, I'd written a novel called Barefoot in the Head and it really didn't receive
very kind initial attention, although the premise was simple enough.
Barefoot in the Head was about the world stopped in its tracks by drugs.
This was the late 60s, remember, when the Flower Power people had been around and we had had
all this love in stuff and towards the end of the 60s the bills, as we say in England,
the checks were coming in for all that kind of stuff and they were already finding the
foetuses in the trash cans of Heat Ashbury so that Barefoot in the Head was an ambivalent
book written in a difficult language.
But I poured into it all I knew about A. science fiction and B. writing.
And I was a little surprised at the tepid response it got, the angry response it got,
the anonymous letters.
So I thought, well, let's me finish with the science fiction field.
And I thought, well, before I leave it I ought to write down all that I know and love about it
before I forget.
And so really I settled down with that in mind to write Billionaire Spree and also to have
an argument as I raised my hat and left the science fiction or community.
But by the time I got to the end of the thing, you know, three years had passed and
just writing the book turned me on to science fiction again.
Billionaire Spree is full of Aldous's personal but fascinating ideas.
One provocative idea, heresy to some science fiction fans, was that Hugo Gernsback,
the father of modern science fiction, was a disastrous influence on the field.
We asked Aldous what he meant by that.
Well, as you probably know, that I did say something of that sort and since then people
have been threatening to break my legs and my arms and shoot me and hang me and kick
me out of the science fiction field and all sorts of things like that.
But I guess that what I was worried about was the way science fiction was segregated
by Gernsback into a magazine so that if you wanted to find science fiction you had to
go to a magazine that had a name like Astounding or Amazing or Staggering, which had a huge
three-dimensional title with rivets in it.
That resulted in a mono culture and we all know that there are dangers in mono culture.
And I simply thought that the science fiction would be better as an uncaged animal that could
rove at large where it would.
But nowadays people complain that science fiction is segregated and that people think
you're funny if you read it and that it has to have a special place in a bookshop right
next to weirdo cult books about flying saucers or whatever.
Well, my answer to that is that yes, I agree, I think that's too bad.
I think science fiction is much better than that.
But the reason why it is there is because of the segregation that was introduced by Hugo
Gernsback.
That was my argument.
Anyone seeking to gain a perspective on science fiction and fantasy should read Billion
Meier Spree, a personal but fascinating account of the field by one of science fiction's true
men of letters.
Tomorrow more with Brian Aldis.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Darrell Ang.
Brian Aldis does unexpected but fascinating things in his science fiction stories.
Though Aldis is often an innovator, he also understands and cherishes the traditions of
science fiction.
Aldis has demonstrated his fondness for science fiction's past by redoing some of its classic
novels.
An island called Moro, for instance, was based on H.G. Wells, the island of Dr. Moro.
In his book, Frankenstein Unbound, drew on Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, published in 1818,
which some call a first science fiction novel.
Aldis relates the impulse behind his writing of Frankenstein Unbound.
I think that I write about the things that fascinate me most, and I'm kind of a literary
man.
And I certainly much admire Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.
It's the most remarkable work for anyone, not least for a young lady, not quite touching
18.
And when I had the impulse to write Frankenstein Unbound, it was really an exegetical impulse
to draw everybody's attention, if possible, to the excellence of that original novel,
which, as you know, has been slandered and pilloried by the filmmakers who've seen nothing
better in it than a stupid, shambling and inarticulate monster.
I wanted to restore the monster to his true evil power as an articulate feeling and maimed
being worthy of our compassion, perhaps our hatred.
Aldis says there was a true creative impulse behind Frankenstein Unbound.
But that wasn't so for an island called Moro.
I have to admit that later on I did the same thing with Wells' Island of Dr. Moro, and
that was, I believe, an advice.
It's one of the few novels I've written that didn't begin with some kind of genuine lust
to create, will to create with fire in my stomach.
I just thought it was something I could do, and that was too tiny a motive, I believe,
for the book that I eventually turned out.
I don't believe that it supersedes or in any way aids the Wells' version.
The funny thing is, I have to say, that that novel was extremely well received.
And in this country and in Great Britain.
Another Aldis tribute to science fiction's past is his novella, The Saliva Tree.
It's a playful book, a clever tribute to H.G. Wells, who happens to be an unseen character in it.
It's about an invisible alien monster ravaging the countryside of late Victorian England.
Invading monsters and invisibility are two of Wells' themes, of course, and during the story,
all of Wells' themes and the titles of his books are somehow worked in.
The story's main character, Gregory Rolls, has been writing letters to H.G. Wells
about the happenings in the countryside.
Wells comes to meet Rolls as the story ends.
Our central character is about to relate to H.G. Wells the horrific events that have gone on down on the farm.
And in those events are really the germs for all of Wells' science fiction.
I mean, you know, there's a kind of a joke on H.G. Wells there.
I mean, we all owe a great debt to H.G. Wells because he preempted almost all of the science fiction themes.
And so in a way, the saliva tree is a kind of horrific joke to show that in fact,
Wells didn't have any original ideas.
They were all given to him by this guy who knocks on the door at the end of the story.
More on the works of Brian Aldis next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show is a production of the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
English science fiction author Brian Aldis sometimes writes books which are difficult to categorize.
Aldis has written familiar science fiction such as his first novel, which was published in this country in 1959 as Starship.
But many of his novels are experimental or avant-garde in both theme and structure.
Report on Probability A published in 1969 is a good example of his type.
A 1976 novel though, The Melasia Tapestry, is one of his most unique novels, a strange but richly rewarding book.
And it completely resists categories.
It could be called science fiction, but it's not quite that.
Some might say it's fantasy, but it's not that either.
Aldis talks about the inspiration behind the book.
The model I had was a pictorial one.
That's often the case.
Well, in several of my novels, I start from a pictorial beginning.
And my pictorial beginnings with Melasia were the etchings which the Italian artist, the Baroque artist, G.B.T. Epileau, made at the end of his life.
Towards the end of his life, he retired and he started etching these mysterious little pictures of women.
Wizards, Monte Banks, soldiers, punchinellos, people being dug out of the ground from graves, owls, serpents burning on altars.
All sorts of mysterious symbols in these lovely little pictures.
And no one's actually figured out what they meant to be.
It's like a science-fiction alternative world where magic rules, I suppose you'd say, and I suppose that was one of the things I liked about them.
So I thought, well, if no one else can reconstruct this world to their satisfaction, I'll have a go at it.
And so I started writing short stories around the more haunting of these etchings of T. Epileaus.
Melasia itself is a grand city which exists in what appears to be an alternate universe, suggestive of Earth's ancient past.
There is no technology to speak of, sorcery of a limited sort seems to work, and there are all manner of exotic creatures such as flying beings which resemble humans.
The novel's main concern is art, an unusual theme for a science-fiction or fantasy book, seemingly more appropriate for a romantic poet.
Aldous told us that the theme of art came out of a serious illness he had while writing the book.
The effect of this internal complaint I had, this hepatitis, made me feel that, well, my lifespan was limited, and I'd froliced about a good deal and had written some books that I perhaps didn't take as seriously as I should do,
and that what I dearly loved was writing, and that I wanted to make a statement about art.
And really, Melasia is, it's all about art from the title onwards.
In other words, if the book has a power, it is the power of meditations on the nature of art, which is at once to transfigure, and at the same time to petrify.
And as you know, Melasia itself is a city-state under a curse of zero change.
Well, that's like a work of art, it's like Tiepolo's little etchings. They may be forever enigmatic to us, but they're forever unchanging.
The Melasia Tapestry by one of the masters of modern science fiction, a difficult novel to categorize but a fascinating one to read.
More with author Brian Aldous on our next show.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
Brian Aldous' latest science fiction novel is the masterful achievement of an author who is at the height of his very awesome powers.
It's called Heliconia Spring, and it's the first volume of a trilogy about an Earth-like planet called Heliconia.
Aldous tells us about the planet and the books.
Heliconia is the name of a planet that's really much like Earth, and a lot of Earth-like things go on there.
But it is the child of binary suns, and it takes two and a half thousand years to go around the primary.
I mean two and a half thousand Earth years.
Which is to say that between one winter and the next, you can have a whole lot of civilizations doing a whole lot of declining and falling.
And of course, falling and rising.
And so that these three long volumes really just cover parts of one of Heliconia's great years.
So there's at once this marvellous continuity, as I see it, of one year and yet of many generations and many cultures.
And that's the basic plan of the book.
They're simply titled, The First One's Heliconia Spring, that's the one that's out.
The one I'm writing is Heliconia Summer, and after that I go on to Heliconia Winter.
The first volume traces the life of a nomadic hunter named Yuli and his descendants.
Because the first volume is about the sun bursting out.
The first volume is just stacked full of things bursting out, and people bursting out, animals bursting out.
It's a great bursting out novel.
Circling Heliconia is a satellite from Earth, a huge observation station which monitors everything that happens in Heliconia and beams it to Earth.
Aldous spent a painstaking four years on the book, striving for accuracy and realism.
Well, I hope people will find that it's full of reality.
That's why I say the moral of it should be mere existence, because I think they recognize their own lives passing through the book.
And the other motive I had was that I grew rather alarmed at the way so much science fiction, since it's become more popular,
has been full of, what shall we say, fantasy, wish fulfillment.
I didn't like that. I think that science fiction should reflect the facts of life, the hard facts of life.
It shouldn't just be some nonsense about one guy against a malign empire who goes out and kills the chief baddie.
I thought it should have a little more contact for reality, and moreover, I'll sound old fashioned if I say this,
but I think that sort of thing is better for the nation's youth than the old hogwash about telepathic dragons and all the rest of it.
Hello, Coney, a spring is a remarkable and unique achievement by a man who is not just a great science fiction writer, but one of the finest writers of our time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.